Prepare for future KEMs (#131)
cfrg/draft-irtf-cfrg-hpke: draft-irtf-cfrg-hpke.md

    target: https://secg.org/sec1-v2.pdf
    date: 2009

  BHK09:
    title: "Subtleties in the Definition of IND-CCA: When and How Should Challenge-Decryption be Disallowed?"
    target: https://eprint.iacr.org/2009/418
    date: 2009
    author:
      -
        ins: Mihir Bellare
        org: University of California San Diego
      -
        ins: Dennis Hofheinz
        org: CWI Amsterdam
      -
        ins: Eike Kiltz
        org: CWI Amsterdam

>   SigncryptionDZ10: DOI.10.1007/978-3-540-89411-7

Reviewer: I'm dubious about referencing signcryption... as I understand it, this is far more nascent than the other foundational work we cite.

Author: It is right that it there is a lot of movement in the field of signcryption. That is part of the reason why notions adapted to HPKE are in the works. I'll inline the notions, then we see if this looks alright.

- `(skX, pkX)`: A KEM key pair used in role X; `skX` is the private
  key and `pkX` is the public key.
- `pk(skX)`: The KEM public key corresponding to the KEM private key
  `skX`. Depending on its use and the KEM, this is either the computation
  of the public key using the private key, or just syntax expressing the
  retrieval of the public key assuming it is stored along with the private

>   key object.

Reviewer: This seems like an implementation detail, so I'd remove it.

Author: I added this because #84 mentioned that for example RSA does not have this clear of a relation between public key and secret key; at least computing the public key from the secret key involves a lot of computation in RSA. We could mention it elsewhere in the document? Maybe just move the new text to the Future KEMs section?

Author: Moved to Future KEMs for now.

Reviewer: 👍

HPKE variants rely on the following primitives:

* A Key Encapsulation Mechanism (KEM):

>   - GenerateKeyPair() (OPTIONAL): Generate a key pair `(skX, pkX)`

Reviewer: Hmm, this seems mandatory since it's used in Encap, no? Is the idea that future Encaps might not have a key generation function? If not, how would keys, well, be generated?

Author: For DHKEM it is mandatory because it is used in Encap/Decap as you say. Other KEMs, and RSA for example, do not use it in Encap. For these KEMs, the HPKE implementation can receive the keys from outside (the higher-level application). The keys would then also be assumed to be generated by the application. The RFCs mentioning RSA KEMs https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5990 and https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8017 for example do not mention key generation at all.

Author: Having said that, I agree that saying `OPTIONAL` if the DHKEMs defined in the document definitely require it, is odd. We could write optional in lowercase, or don't mention it in the Cryptographic Dependencies section at all and only leave the explanation in the Future KEMs section. Do you have a preference?

Author: I reverted all my changes related to making these functions optional, because:
- For GenerateKeyPair, any KEM (and RSA too) can just write something like “GenerateKeyPair is defined as in [reference]” and fullfil the requirement easily like this.
- DeriveKeyPair(ikm): here, I see two possibilities:
  * any KEM (and also RSA) could just pass a complete keypair `sk, pk` to the function and let the function be the identity function
  * any KEM (and also RSA) could pass whatever encoding of a complete keypair to the function and let the function be the deserialization of this encoding.

Do we need to mention this in the document?

Reviewer: I don't think it's necessary. Thanks!

  - DeriveKeyPair(ikm) (OPTIONAL): Derive a key pair `(skX, pkX)` from
    the byte string `ikm`, where `ikm` SHOULD have at least `Nsk` bytes
    of entropy (see {{derive-key-pair}} for discussion)
  - SerializePublicKey(pk): Produce a byte string of length `Npk`
    encoding the KEM public key `pk`. A KEM MAY provide multiple
    different equivalent encoding algorithms for public keys, with

>     different output lengths `Npk`.

Reviewer: Using a single constant to refer to multiple values seems error prone. Can we avoid this?

  - DeserializePublicKey(enc): Parse the byte string `enc` of length `Npk`
    to recover a KEM public key. This function can raise an error upon
    `enc` deserialization failure.

>   - SerializeCiphertext(ct): Produce a byte string of length `Nenc`

Reviewer: Should we this `SerializeEncapsulatedKey`, rather than ciphertext? (That would align better with the KEM vocabulary, I think.)

Author: :+1:

HPKE variants rely on the following primitives:

* A Key Encapsulation Mechanism (KEM):
  - GenerateKeyPair(): Generate a key pair `(skX, pkX)`.
  - DeriveKeyPair(ikm): Derive a key pair `(skX, pkX)` from the byte
    string `ikm`, where `ikm` SHOULD have at least `Nsk` bytes of entropy
    (see {{derive-key-pair}} for discussion).
  - SerializePublicKey(pkX): Produce a byte string of maximum length `Npk`
    encoding the KEM public key `pkX`. A KEM MAY provide multiple
    different equivalent encoding algorithms for public keys, with
    different output lengths.
  - DeserializePublicKey(pkXm): Parse the byte string `pkXm` of length `Npk`
    to recover a KEM public key. This function can raise an error upon
    `pkXm` deserialization failure.

>   - SerializeEncapsulatedKey(pkE): Produce a byte string of maximum length `Nenc`

Reviewer: This change takes the complexity hit so that future documents don't need to. If we don't want this complexity, then I concur with the simplification above. (I don't think it's much complexity, so I'm OK adding it here.)

>   - SerializeEncapsulatedKey(pkE): Produce a byte string of maximum length `Nenc`

Author: I like the simpler approach. I was not happy about the clutter I introduced with the other (De)Serialize functions.

>   - SerializeEncapsulatedKey(pkE): Produce a byte string of maximum length `Nenc`

Author: Also, while it has been pointed out to us that there is a post-quantum KEM that provides different encodings for public keys, nobody told us about a KEM with different encodings for encapsulated keys, so this was just an idea that theoretically this could be the case. I did not have time yet to look at all the post-quantum KEM proposals.

Anyway, all this to say that I am fine with dropping this explicit definitions.

    algorithms for KEM ciphertexts, with different output lengths.
  - DeserializeEncapsulatedKey(enc): Parse the byte string `enc` of
    length `Nenc` to recover a KEM ciphertext. This function can raise
    an error upon `enc` deserialization failure.
  - Encap(pk): Generate an ephemeral, fixed-length symmetric key (the
    KEM shared secret) and a fixed-length encapsulation of that key that
    can be decapsulated by the holder of the private key corresponding to pk.
  - Decap(enc, sk): Use the private key `sk` to recover the ephemeral
    symmetric key (the KEM shared secret) from its encapsulated representation `enc`.
  - AuthEncap(pkR, skS) (OPTIONAL): Same as Encap(), and the outputs
    encode an assurance that the KEM shared secret key was generated by the
    holder of the private key `skS`.
  - AuthDecap(skR, pkS) (OPTIONAL): Same as Decap(), and the recipient
    is assured that the KEM shared secret was generated by the holder of
    the private key `skS`.
  - Nzz: The length in bytes of a KEM shared secret produced by this KEM.
  - Nenc: The maximum length in bytes of an encapsulated key produced by this KEM.

>   - Npk: The maximum length in bytes of an encoded public key for this KEM.

Reviewer: > Disagree with this change. Making these values "maximum" implies that the fields they describe are variable-length, but SerializePublicKey and Encap both produce fixed-size values.

That's correct -- they *may* be variable length for future KEMs.

    from input keying material `IKM` and an optional byte string
    `salt`.
  - Expand(PRK, info, L): Expand a pseudorandom key `PRK` using
    optional string `info` into `L` bytes of output keying material.
  - Nh: The output size of the Extract function in bytes.

* An AEAD encryption algorithm {{!RFC5116}}:
  - Seal(key, nonce, aad, pt): Encrypt and authenticate plaintext
    `pt` with associated data `aad` using secret key `key` and nonce
    `nonce`, yielding ciphertext and tag `ct` (note: this function
     can raise a `NonceOverflowError` upon failure).
  - Open(key, nonce, aad, ct): Decrypt ciphertext and tag `ct` using
    associated data `aad` with secret key `key` and nonce `nonce`,
    returning plaintext message `pt` (note: this function can raise an
    `OpenError` or `NonceOverflowError` upon failure).
  - Nk: The length in bytes of a key for this algorithm.
  - Nn: The length in bytes of a nonce for this algorithm.

A set of algorithm identifiers for concrete instantiations of these
primitives is provided in {{ciphersuites}}.  Algorithm identifier
values are two bytes long.

Note that `GenerateKeyPair` can be implemented as `DeriveKeyPair(random(Nsk))`.

> The notation `pk(skX)`, depending on its use and the KEM, is either the

Reviewer: 👍

    public key `pkX`. A KEM MAY provide multiple
    different equivalent encoding algorithms for public keys, with
    different output lengths.
  - `Encap(pk)`: Randomized algorithm to generate an ephemeral,
    fixed-length symmetric key (the KEM shared secret) and
    a fixed-length encapsulation of that key that can be decapsulated
    by the holder of the private key corresponding to `pk`.
  - `Decap(enc, sk)`: Deterministic algorithm using the private key `sk`
    to recover the ephemeral symmetric key (the KEM shared secret) from
    its encapsulated representation `enc`. This function can raise an
    `DecapError` on decapsulation failure.
  - `AuthEncap(pkR, skS)` (optional): Same as `Encap()`, and the outputs
    encode an assurance that the KEM shared secret was generated by the
    holder of the private key `skS`.
  - `AuthDecap(skR, pkS)` (optional): Same as `Decap()`, and the recipient
    is assured that the KEM shared secret was generated by the holder of
    the private key `skS`.
  - `Nsecret`: The length in bytes of a KEM shared secret produced by this KEM
  - `Nenc`: The length in bytes of an encapsulated key produced by this KEM

>   - `Npk`: The maximum length in bytes of an encoded public key for this KEM

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `Npk`: The length in bytes of an encoded public key for this KEM
```

- GenerateKeyPair(): Generate an ephemeral key pair `(skX, pkX)`
  for the DH group in use
- DeriveKeyPair(ikm): Derive a key pair `(skX, pkX)` from
  the byte string `ikm`, where `ikm` SHOULD have at least `Nsk` bytes
  of entropy (see {{derive-key-pair}} for discussion)
- DH(sk, pk): Perform a non-interactive DH exchange using the
  private key sk and public key pk to produce a Diffie-Hellman
  shared secret of length Ndh
- Serialize(pk): Produce a byte string of length `Npk`
  encoding the public key `pk`.
- Deserialize(enc): Parse a byte string of length `Npk` to recover a
  public key (note: this function can raise an error upon `enc` deserialization failure)
- Ndh: The length in bytes of a Diffie-Hellman shared secret produced
  by the DH function of this KEM
- Nsk: The length in bytes of a Diffie-Hellman private key

> `Serialize` implements both `SerializePublicKey` and `SerializeCiphertext`,
> as an encapsulated key is a Diffie-Hellman public key in this KEM
> algorithm. Likewise, `Deserialize` implements both `DeserializePublicKey`
> and `DeserializeCiphertext`. `Npk` and `Nenc` are equal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since an encapsulated key is a Diffie-Hellman public key in this KEM algorithm,
`SerializePublicKey` and `SerializeCiphertext` are equivalent (`Npk` = `Nenc`).
Thus, we implement both using a single function called `Serialize`. `Deserialize`
is implemented similarly.
```

Author: :+1:

- GenerateKeyPair(): Generate an ephemeral key pair `(skX, pkX)`
  for the DH group in use
- DeriveKeyPair(ikm): Derive a key pair `(skX, pkX)` from
  the byte string `ikm`, where `ikm` SHOULD have at least `Nsk` bytes
  of entropy (see {{derive-key-pair}} for discussion)
- DH(sk, pk): Perform a non-interactive DH exchange using the
  private key sk and public key pk to produce a Diffie-Hellman
  shared secret of length Ndh
- Serialize(pk): Produce a byte string of length `Npk`

>   encoding the public key `pk`.

Reviewer: Some of these list items have a terminating period, and others don't. Can we add periods to all list items (here and above)?

following operations:

- GenerateKeyPair(): Generate an ephemeral key pair `(skX, pkX)`
  for the DH group in use.
- DeriveKeyPair(ikm): Derive a key pair `(skX, pkX)` from
  the byte string `ikm`, where `ikm` SHOULD have at least `Nsk` bytes
  of entropy (see {{derive-key-pair}} for discussion).
- DH(sk, pk): Perform a non-interactive DH exchange using the
  private key sk and public key pk to produce a Diffie-Hellman
  shared secret of length Ndh.
- Serialize(pk): Produce a byte string of length `Npk`
  encoding the public key `pk`.
- Deserialize(enc): Parse a byte string of length `Npk` to recover a

>   public key. This function can raise an error upon `enc` deserialization

Author: The above error names vanished now except the errors from Seal and Open. Do you want to remove those names as well? We are using them in the pseudo code, so I guess not?

### DeriveKeyPair {#derive-key-pair}

The keys that DeriveKeyPair produces have only as much entropy as the provided
input keying material (IKM). For a given KEM, the IKM given to DeriveKeyPair SHOULD
have length at least `Nsk` bytes, and SHOULD have at least `Nsk` bytes of entropy.

> All invocations of KDF functions (such as `LabeledExtract` or `LabeledExpand`) in any

Reviewer: 👍

as described in {{RFC7748}}. In particular, recipients MUST check whether
the Diffie-Hellman shared secret is the all-zero value and abort if so.

### Future KEMs {#future-kems}

{{kem-security}} lists security requirements on a KEM used within HPKE.

The `AuthEncap` and `AuthDecap` functions are OPTIONAL. If a KEM algorithm
does not provide them, only the Base and PSK modes of HPKE are supported.
Future specifications which define new KEMs MUST indicate whether or not
these modes are supported.

A KEM algorithm MAY define multiple different equivalent encoding
algorithms for KEM public keys or KEM ciphertexts, with different output
lengths. In this case `Npk` and `Nenc` MUST indicate the maximum output
length. It is left to the application using HPKE to define how entities
communicate which encoding is used.

> The notation `pk(skX)`, depending on its use and the KEM, is either the

Reviewer: This feels out of place in this section. Perhaps this should go underneath the KEM interface description? (That is, right below the list of functions.)

as described in {{RFC7748}}. In particular, recipients MUST check whether
the Diffie-Hellman shared secret is the all-zero value and abort if so.

### Future KEMs {#future-kems}

{{kem-security}} lists security requirements on a KEM used within HPKE.

The `AuthEncap` and `AuthDecap` functions are OPTIONAL. If a KEM algorithm
does not provide them, only the Base and PSK modes of HPKE are supported.
Future specifications which define new KEMs MUST indicate whether or not
these modes are supported.

A KEM algorithm MAY define multiple different equivalent encoding
algorithms for KEM public keys or KEM ciphertexts, with different output
lengths. In this case `Npk` and `Nenc` MUST indicate the maximum output
length. It is left to the application using HPKE to define how entities

> communicate which encoding is used.

Reviewer 2: Having multiple different equivalent encodings seems like a bad idea.   Why are we accommodating this?

Reviewer: I think this is just a presentation issue. It may be the case that future KEMs output encapsulated keys with non-fixed-length. So we can either (a) require that those KEMs normalize on a fixed length, or (b) acknowledge that they may be variable length here, right?

Author: We are accommodating this because of this review comment we got (https://github.com/cfrg/draft-irtf-cfrg-hpke/issues/84):

```
Assumptions about the length of the public key. It may not always be a
fixed value, "Npk", for a KEM with a given set of parameters. The other
(and unrelated) "hybrid" draft, draft-ietf-tls-hybrid-design, Section 3.2,
makes accommodation for public keys associated with a given set of
parameters to vary in size.
```

Here is a quote from Section 3.2 from https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-tls-hybrid-design-00
```
for example, the SIKE key encapsulation mechanism permits
compressed or uncompressed public keys at each security level, and
the compressed and uncompressed formats are interoperable.
```

Author: I have no strong opinion on if we should require that those KEMs normalize on a fixed length or if we should just acknowledge the variable lengths. It might be beneficial to leave more freedom to future KEMs. I agree though that the current “maximum length” formulations seem a bit messy.

as described in {{RFC7748}}. In particular, recipients MUST check whether
the Diffie-Hellman shared secret is the all-zero value and abort if so.

### Future KEMs {#future-kems}

{{kem-security}} lists security requirements on a KEM used within HPKE.

The `AuthEncap()` and `AuthDecap()` functions are OPTIONAL. If a KEM algorithm
does not provide them, only the Base and PSK modes of HPKE are supported.
Future specifications which define new KEMs MUST indicate whether or not
these modes are supported.

> A KEM algorithm MAY define multiple different equivalent encoding
> algorithms for KEM public keys, with different output lengths. In this
> case `Npk` MUST indicate the maximum output length. It is left to the
> application using HPKE to define how entities communicate which encoding
> is used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A KEM algorithm may support different encoding algorithms, with different output
lengths, for KEM public keys. Such KEM algorithms MUST specify only one encoding
algorithm whose output length is `Npk`.
```

as described in {{RFC7748}}. In particular, recipients MUST check whether
the Diffie-Hellman shared secret is the all-zero value and abort if so.

### Future KEMs {#future-kems}

{{kem-security}} lists security requirements on a KEM used within HPKE.

The `AuthEncap()` and `AuthDecap()` functions are OPTIONAL. If a KEM algorithm
does not provide them, only the Base and PSK modes of HPKE are supported.
Future specifications which define new KEMs MUST indicate whether or not

> Auth and AuthPSK modes are supported.

Reviewer 2: Should we add a column to the registry to reflect this?

Author: I think this could be a good idea. I drafted one with the most recent commit.

detailed below:

* Message secrecy: Confidentiality of the sender's messages against

>   chosen ciphertext attacks, i.e., IND-CCA2 security

Author: I removed this, because IND-CCA2 is not well-defined for the authenticated modes. ABHKLR20 uses different names (Outsider-CCA and Insider-CCA), so we could add them here, but there is no security notions for the PSK yet.

both compromised. NaCl's `box` interface {{NaCl}} has the same issue. At
the same time, this enables repudiability.

Even though it is possible to construct an authenticated
KEM that is resistant against key-compromise impersonation, a key-compromise
impersonation stays generally possible on the level of HPKE, as shown by {{ABHKLR20}}.
That is because the KEM ciphertext is not bound to the HPKE message.
Thus, an adversary who knows a recipients private key, can decapsulate an
observed KEM ciphertext, compute the key schedule, and encrypt an arbitrary
message that the recipient will accept as coming from the original sender.
Mitigating this issue would require fundamental changes, which are
out-of-scope of this document.

Applications that require resistance against key-compromise impersonation
SHOULD take extra steps to prevent this attack. One possibility is to

> produce a digital signature over the Auth and AuthPSK `enc` output using

Author: Signing only the KEM ciphertext would not solve the problem pointed out by the generic attack from ABHKLR20.

the sender private key `skS` is not compromised at the time of message
reception. In the AuthPSK mode, sender authentication is generally
expected to hold if at the time of message reception, the sender private
key skS and the pre-shared key are not both compromised.

### Key-Compromise Impersonation

The DHKEM variants defined in this document are
vulnerable to key-compromise impersonation attacks {{?BJM97=DOI.10.1007/BFb0024447}},
which means that sender authentication cannot be expected to hold in the
Auth mode if the recipient private key `skR` is compromised, and in the
AuthPSK mode if the pre-shared key and the recipient private key `skR` are
both compromised. NaCl's `box` interface {{NaCl}} has the same issue. At
the same time, this enables repudiability.

As shown by {{ABHKLR20}}, key-compromise impersonation attacks are generally possible on HPKE
because KEM ciphertexts are not bound to HPKE messages. An adversary who

> knows a recipients private key, can decapsulate an observed KEM ciphertext,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
knows a recipient's private key can decapsulate an observed KEM ciphertext,
```

both compromised. NaCl's `box` interface {{NaCl}} has the same issue. At
the same time, this enables repudiability.

Even though it is possible to construct an authenticated
KEM that is resistant against key-compromise impersonation, a key-compromise
impersonation stays generally possible on the level of HPKE, as shown by {{ABHKLR20}}.
That is because the KEM ciphertext is not bound to the HPKE message.
Thus, an adversary who knows a recipients private key, can decapsulate an
observed KEM ciphertext, compute the key schedule, and encrypt an arbitrary
message that the recipient will accept as coming from the original sender.
Mitigating this issue would require fundamental changes, which are
out-of-scope of this document.

Applications that require resistance against key-compromise impersonation
SHOULD take extra steps to prevent this attack. One possibility is to

> produce a digital signature over the entire HPKE message using a sender's private key,

Reviewer: Can we be more precise here? What specifically is "HPKE message"? Is it the tuple (enc, ciphertext), where ciphertext is application data encrypted under the HPKE-derived key?

setting, the remaining security level is smaller and defined by the
post-quantum security level of the AEAD scheme.

## Security Requirements on a KEM used within HPKE {#kem-security}

The Encap/Decap interface of a KEM used within HPKE MUST be
IND-CCA2-secure.

The AuthEncap/AuthDecap interface of a KEM used within HPKE MUST be

> Insider-CCA-secure and Insider-Auth-secure. If the application does not

Reviewer: I'm not sure Insider-CCA-secure and insider-Auth-secure are common terms. We should probably define them.

Author: Yes, we should define them somehow. Similar notions have been around in Signcryption literature for a while, but it is true that they are not so commen, and also the notions I am working on with the others are a bit different. Should we define them in an appendix?

Reviewer: Eh... maybe? Or inline here?

setting, the remaining security level is smaller and defined by the
post-quantum security level of the AEAD scheme.

## Security Requirements on a KEM used within HPKE {#kem-security}

The Encap/Decap interface of a KEM used within HPKE MUST be
IND-CCA2-secure. An appropriate definition of this security notion for
KEMs can be found in {{BHK09}}.

The AuthEncap/AuthDecap interface of a KEM used within HPKE MUST be
multi-user insider IND-CCA-secure and multi-user insider strongly

> unforgeable (sUF-CMA-secure) as defined in {{SigncryptionDZ10}}.

Reviewer: To clarify: does DHKEM achieve this notion?

Author: DHKEM is not “multi-user insider strongly unforgeable (sUF-CMA-secure)” because of KCI.

> If the application does not require resistance against key-compromise

Reviewer: I might remove this. I can't see a case where KCI resistance would not be desirable.

Author: True, but at the same time, DHKEM is not resistant against KCI and thus falls into this category (that's why I added this sentence).

Reviewer: Doh, right, yes. Thanks!

setting, the remaining security level is smaller and defined by the
post-quantum security level of the AEAD scheme.

## Security Requirements on a KEM used within HPKE {#kem-security}

A KEM used within HPKE MUST allow HPKE to satisfy its desired security
properties described in {{sec-properties}}. There are indications that

> this is the case

Reviewer 2: "There are indications" is quite vague.  What indications?

Or do you mean "the following criteria are sufficient to meet HPKE's security needs"?

Author: Yes, it basically means "the following criteria are sufficient to meet HPKE's security needs". However, there is no proof yet that these criteria are actually sufficient for HPKE. Hence “indications”.

In Section “Security Considerations” we already have the formulation “The results from {{CS01}} provide some indication that any IND-CCA2-secure KEM will suffice here, but are not conclusive given the differences in the schemes.”; that is from where I borrowed “there are indications”.

These indications come from `CS01` and `SigncryptionDZ10`, as listed in the list elements.

Would it be better already if we said “{{CS01}} and {{SigncryptionDZ10}} provide some indications that the following criteria are sufficient to meet HPKE's security needs”?

some indication that any IND-CCA2-secure KEM will suffice here, but are
not conclusive given the differences in the schemes.

A detailed computational analysis of HPKE's Auth mode single-shot
encryption API has been done in {{ABHKLR20}}.
The paper defines security notions for authenticated
KEMs and for authenticated public key encryption, using the outsider and
insider security terminology known from signcryption {{SigncryptionDZ10}}.
The analysis proves that DHKEM's `AuthEncap()`/`AuthDecap()` interface
fulfills these notions for all Diffie-Hellman groups specified in this document,
and indicates exact security bounds, under the assumption that the
gap Diffie-Hellman (GDH) problem is hard in the appropriate subgroup {{GAP}},
and that HKDF can be modeled as a random oracle.

> Further, the paper proves composition theorems, showing that HPKE's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Further, {{ABHKLR20}} proves composition theorems, showing that HPKE's
```

Auth mode fulfills the security notions of authenticated public key encryption
for all KDFs and AEAD schemes specified in this document, given any
authenticated KEM satisfying the previously defined security notions
for authenticated KEMs. The assumptions on the KDF are that `Extract()`
and `Expand()` can be modeled as pseudorandom functions wherein the first

> argument is the key, respectively; the assumption for the AEAD is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
argument is the key, respectively. The assumption for the AEAD is
```

IND-CCA2 security.

In summary, the analysis in {{ABHKLR20}} proves that the single-shot encryption API of HPKE's
Auth mode satisfies the desired message confidentiality and sender
authentication properties listed at the beginning of this section;
it does not consider multiple messages, nor the secret export API.

### Post-Quantum Security

All of {{CS01}}, {{HPKEAnalysis}}, and {{ABHKLR20}} are premised on
classical security models and assumptions, and do not consider
adversaries capable of quantum computation. A full proof of post-quantum
security would need to take appropriate security models and assumptions
into account, in addition to simply using a post-quantum KEM. However,
the composition theorems from {{ABHKLR20}} for HPKE's Auth mode only make
standard assumptions (i.e., no random oracle assumption) that are expected
to hold against quantum adversaries (although with slightly worse bounds).
Thus, these composition theorems, in combination with a post-quantum-secure

> authenticated KEM, guarantee the post-quantum security of HPKE's Auth mode
> (as a reminder, DHKEM is not post-quantum-secure).

Reviewer: I think this much is clear!

```suggestion
authenticated KEM, guarantee the post-quantum security of HPKE's Auth mode.
```

In future work, the analysis from {{ABHKLR20}} can be extended to cover
HPKE's other modes and desired security properties.
The hybrid quantum-resistance property described above, which is achieved
by using the PSK or AuthPSK mode, is not proven in {{HPKEAnalysis}} because
this analysis requires the random oracle model; in a quantum
setting, this model needs adaption to, for example, the quantum random
oracle model.

## Security Requirements on a KEM used within HPKE {#kem-security}

A KEM used within HPKE MUST allow HPKE to satisfy its desired security
properties described in {{sec-properties}}. In particular, the KEM
shared secret MUST be a uniformly random byte string of length `Nsecret`.

> (This means, for instance, that it would not be sufficient if the KEM
> shared secret is only uniformly random as an element of some set prior
> to its encoding as byte string.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means, for instance, that it would not be sufficient if the KEM
shared secret is only uniformly random as an element of some set prior
to its encoding as byte string.
```

* Value: The two-byte identifier for the algorithm
* KEM: The name of the algorithm
* Nzz: The length in bytes of a KEM shared secret produced by the algorithm

> * Nenc: The length in bytes of an encapsulated key produced by the algorithm.

Reviewer: Maybe this should be the maximum length of an encapsulated key? The text below (suggesting that there are different lengths that need to be specified) seems odd. Really this value is in place to help with allocations and whatnot, right?

Author: I like your idea of the maximum length. For the NIST P-curves, the deserialize algorithm is actually specified this way: it takes up to the maximum length, and a condition inside decides if decompression is done, depending on the actually received size.

  An algorithm MAY define multiple different equivalent encoding
  algorithms with different output lengths; in this case these different
  lengths MUST be indicated.

> * Npk: The length in bytes of an encoded public key for the algorithm.

Reviewer: Same suggestion here for maximum length.

* Value: The two-byte identifier for the algorithm
* KEM: The name of the algorithm
* Nsecret: The length in bytes of a KEM shared secret produced by the algorithm
* Nenc: The length in bytes of an encoded encapsulated key produced by the algorithm

> * Npk: The maximum length in bytes of an encoded public key for the algorithm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Npk: The length in bytes of an encoded public key for the algorithm
```
